Improve ad-hoc query documentation. (#3001)
feldera/feldera: docs/sql/ad-hoc.md

# Ad-hoc SQL queries

You can run ad-hoc SQL queries on a running or paused pipeline. Unlike Feldera SQL programs that define pipelines and
are evaluated incrementally, ad-hoc queries are evaluated in batch-mode,
using the [datafusion engine](https://datafusion.apache.org).

Ad-hoc queries provide a cheap way to query the state of a materialized view. They are designed to aid
development and debugging, so you need to be aware of their limitations to avoid potential confusion.

## Limitations

:::info

Tables and views are only accessible to `SELECT` ad-hoc queries if they are declared as [materialized](/sql/materialized).

:::

> Feldera does not guarantee consistency between SQL dialects of Feldera SQL programs and ad-hoc queries as the former

Reviewer: ```
::: info
As of now, there are differences between the SQL dialects of Feldera SQL programs and ad-hoc queries, because they use different engines (Apache Calcite for Feldera SQL vs. Apache Datafusion for ad-hoc queries). We hope to relax this in the future. 
```

Reviewer 2: we do not want to relax this, we want to improve this.
it's already too relaxed

is used in an incremental view maintenance (IVM) context and the latter is not. They also use different engines
(Apache Calcite for Feldera SQL vs. Apache Datafusion for ad-hoc queries).

Currently, only `SELECT` and `INSERT` statements are supported. You can not create or alter tables and views using
ad-hoc SQL.

### Differences between Feldera SQL and Ad-hoc Queries

Ad-hoc queries may produce slightly different results compared to what Feldera outputs due to differences in query
engines. However, for the common subset of SQL, results should be consistent, aside from minor differences
like floating-point rounding or decimal precision handling.

There are some known, notable differences in the SQL dialect between Feldera SQL and ad-hoc queries:

- Rows are not guaranteed to be ordered the same way unless you use an `ORDER BY` clause.
- Feldera SQL's `TIMESTAMP_TRUNC(x, MINUTE)` is `DATE_TRUNC('MINUTE', x)` in ad-hoc queries.
- Feldera SQL's `SORT_ARRAY()` is `ARRAY_SORT()` in ad-hoc queries.

> - `SELECT 1729595568::TIMESTAMP;` in ad-hoc queries will yield `2024-10-22T11:12:48` whereas in Feldera SQL

Reviewer: Why are the timestamps so wildly off? Any explanation?

# Ad-hoc SQL queries

You can run ad-hoc SQL queries on a running or paused pipeline. Unlike Feldera SQL programs that define pipelines and

> are evaluated incrementally, ad-hoc queries are evaluated in batch-mode,

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
are evaluated incrementally, ad-hoc queries are evaluated in batch mode,
```

using the [datafusion engine](https://datafusion.apache.org).

> Ad-hoc queries provide a cheap way to query the state of a materialized view. They are designed to aid

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Ad-hoc queries provide a cheap way to query the state of a materialized table or view. They are designed to aid
```

Reviewer 3: Add a link to the materialized tables/view section in SQL docs.

development and debugging, so you need to be aware of their limitations to avoid potential confusion.

## Limitations

:::info

Tables and views are only accessible to `SELECT` ad-hoc queries if they are declared as [materialized](/sql/materialized).

:::

As of now, there are differences between the SQL dialects of Feldera SQL programs and ad-hoc queries.
This is because they use different engines (Apache Calcite for Feldera SQL vs. Apache Datafusion for ad-hoc queries).
See below for some examples.

Currently, only `SELECT` and `INSERT` statements are supported. You can not create or alter tables and views using
ad-hoc SQL.

### Differences between Feldera SQL and Ad-hoc Queries

> Ad-hoc queries may produce slightly different results compared to what Feldera outputs due to differences in query

Reviewer 3: The first two sentences contradict each other. I think it's ok to say that they produce consistent results on the common subset with some exceptions (we might discover more exceptions in the future).

engines. However, for the common subset of SQL, results should be consistent, aside from minor differences
like floating-point rounding or decimal precision handling.

There are some known, notable differences in the SQL dialect between Feldera SQL and ad-hoc queries:

> - Rows are not guaranteed to be ordered the same way unless you use an `ORDER BY` clause.

Reviewer 3: Feldera ignores the outermost order by, so results will still be inconsistent. So maybe the doc should say smth like:
- the order of output rows is non-deterministic in both dialects without the order by clause
- Feldera ignores the outermost order by clause (and link to the section about that),

- Feldera SQL's `TIMESTAMP_TRUNC(x, MINUTE)` is `DATE_TRUNC('MINUTE', x)` in ad-hoc queries.
- Feldera SQL's `SORT_ARRAY()` is `ARRAY_SORT()` in ad-hoc queries.

> - `SELECT 1729595568::TIMESTAMP;` in ad-hoc queries will yield `2024-10-22T11:12:48`

Reviewer 3: I'd start with describing the issue--int to timestamp conversion assumes milliseconds since UNIX epoch in Feldera and seconds in datafusion--and then give the example.

  (interpreted as seconds) whereas in Feldera SQL it will return `1970-01-21 00:26:35`
  (interpreted as milliseconds).

> 

Reviewer 3: - datafusion doesn't support as-of joins

We will continue to improve the consistency between the two engines in future releases.

## Usage

Ad-hoc queries can be executed via different Feldera tools both when the pipeline is running or paused.

### Feldera Web Console

> You can issue ad-hoc queries by opening the "Ad-hoc query" tab of the pipeline and typing a SQL SELECT query in

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
You can issue ad-hoc queries by opening the "Ad-hoc query" tab of the pipeline and typing a SQL SELECT or INSERT query in
```

- [.query_parquet](pathname:///python/feldera.html#feldera.pipeline.Pipeline.query_parquet)
  Saves the output of this query to the parquet file.

For `INSERT` queries it is recommended to use the [execute](pathname:///python/feldera.html#feldera.pipeline.Pipeline.execute) method:

```py
pipeline.execute("INSERT INTO tbl VALUES(1, 2, 3);")
```

### REST API

Consult the [query endpoint](/api/execute-an-ad-hoc-query-in-a-running-or-paused-pipeline) reference to run ad-hoc queries directly through the API.

## Architecture

Ad-hoc queries are evaluated using the Apache Datafusion SQL engine against a consistent snapshot of the pipeline's
tables and views. This is achieved using a form of [Multiversion concurrency control](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Multiversion_concurrency_control).
The datafusion engine reads data directly from the pipeline's storage layer, which is shared with the
Feldera SQL engine.

![Architectural Diagram Showing the Datafusion SQL engine in the Feldera pipeline](datafusion.png)

> Ad-hoc queries can use CPU resources and, to a lesser extent, storage (for intermediate results),

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Ad-hoc queries can use CPU resources, memory, and storage (for intermediate results),
```

especially if they are complex or involve scanning large datasets. Since these resources are shared with the
Feldera SQL engine, such queries may reduce pipeline performance during ad-hoc query execution.

For more background on ad-hoc queries you can also read our blog post

> [on inspecting Feldera Pipelines](https://www.feldera.com/blog/inspecting-feldera-pipelines).

Reviewer 3: Maybe also link the tutorial section on ad hoc queries somewhere.
